This is an interview with Dr. Lawrence Franks by
Scott Chancellor on April 18, 1993, at
Nacogdoches, Texas, concerning protest
movements and activism by students on the campus
of the University of Texas from the mid-1960s to
the early 1970s. In the interest of accumulating
knowledge, I'm asking you to donate this tape to me
or to the Texas A&M Oral History Collection in the
University Archives. Is that all right with you?
Yes. Okay, Dr. Franks. What year and where were you
born? I was born March 28, 1916, Stockman, Texas,
in Shelby County. Okay, what is your educational
background? I finished high school, five years of
college with a master's degree and a doctorate
from Indiana University in 1955. Okay,
what was your position at the University of Texas?
I went to work at the University of Texas in Austin
August 1, 1966 as dean of men. The areas over which
our staff had responsibility were student
conduct, student housing, and student
organizations.
What years were you there? I was there from 64 to 77.
Can you describe for me the mood and the atmosphere
on campus during these years where you were there?
Yes. The mood and general climate on college and
university campuses all over the country, and
particularly on the East Coast and the West Coast,
was that of rising wave of activism and protest.
There was a wide range of topics that were being
addressed there and therefore became topics of
discussion on the university campus, the
University of Texas campus. And that was over the
nation's participation in the various wars, the
lack of an aggressive program to promote an
increased minority enrollment, university
regulations dealing with student conduct on and
off campus, women's rights. and a stronger voice
for all students in formulating the new rules and
regulations affecting the lives of all the
students. The university campus and the area
adjacent to it, the campus became a gathering
place for students and non-students to protest
these various issues. The name given to the
organization that was formed was Students for a
Democratic Society, an activist group formed on
the Michigan campus by Tom Hayden, a meeting place
for the new organization that was found across the
street from the campus. One of the early causes
represented by the SDS organization was to stage
nightly demonstrations at a lounge across the
street from the campus at which a black student had
not been allowed to purchase a beer.
Let me add to what I've just said about the
demonstration at the lounge. our role there. When
my staff was represented at one of these
demonstrations, and we saw many, we were there as
observers. We were not there to arrest anybody or
stop anything that was happening, but to observe
and be able to report back to the administration of
the university what we perceived happened on that
occasion, or the demonstration were on campus or
off campus. Okay. What percentage of students
would you say were involved with the protest
movements? Oh, that would be too difficult to come
close, I expect. We would have fifty people, a
hundred people, and then in the days when we had the
largest of protesters. One time 20,000 people
came to the campus protesting in the Cambodian War
and the incident at Kent State where some students
were killed by the National Guard. And of course,
on demonstrations such as this, we had faculty
members, staff members, citizens of the
community, but the hard core And when I say
hardcore, the people who composed the Students
for a Democratic Society, that was a very small,
very small, but vocal group. If I were to take a
figure, I would say it would be less than 5%. We had
24,500 students on the campus that first year I was
there. And so it was a small group. small but vocal.
What type of students were they? Could you
describe how they dressed and describe them?
Well, as we got to know many of them, many of them
were brilliant students from other colleges or
from UT. They were not dummies. They were smart,
brilliant people that had some deep-seated
causes that they wanted to represent. Others,
however, were sort of an unkempt group that
dressed their demeanor, their clothing, their
beard, their hair. And of course, hair became a
symbol of the protest movement, long hair. I
talked to many students on the campus and off the
campus about, why did you let your hair grow wrong?
That's just the style. And I would say, well, does
it have anything to do with the protesting, the
status quo? Yes. Yes. I think they could be
identified as a group whose dress was not like that
of the fraternity men or women. It appeared to me
that they did this on purpose. The women wore their
high-top shoes a lot. It
just didn't look like a little girl was getting
ready to go to a party. A dress was an important part
of the protest, I think. Do you think their dress
presented a negative image to Well, I think for
many people, I think there's a stereotypical
notion that the dress makes the person, and you can
judge a person's character and maybe a lot of other
things about him, about the way he dresses. The
banker goes to work with his pinstripe suit on and
necktie, you know. And the farmer goes to the field
with his overalls and jumper on. So I think that
there's
some mighty fine people that never had a suit of
clothes on. And so we can't conclude that the dress
did any more than represent, and I think it did
represent a mood. The mood was, we'll show you that
we can dress like this. I had trouble one time
getting a person, whether it was an SDS
representative, They were before a committee on
the university campus, and the chairman asked
this man to put his cap on, and he refused. But the
chairman told him that he would not proceed with
the meeting until he put his cap on. Well, that was
sort of the mood that some of the SDS people
presented. And of course, the university would be
just as insistent as we expected to put the camp up
in Germany.
And it did. Okay.
Okay, if you would, discuss SDS on campus, their
role with the students, and how the
administration dealt with them. Well, the two or
three things about the SDS, Students for a
Democratic Society, we got to know some of the
individuals personally. And by the way, there was
President's student body, Jeff Jones. He was a
candidate promoted by the SDS, supported by the
SDS. And enough students on the campus Of course,
we weren't having a whole lot of students vote in
the election.
And one of their protests of not voting in the
election was they didn't have anybody they wanted
to vote for. But one of the members of the SES was the
daughter of one of the university professors. A
very fine family, and she's a very fine person. for
she just held that the university's position on
some of the issues ought to be addressed and
something done about it. They would stage sit-ins
in the building sometime. They would have a
demonstration. If a recruiter came to the campus,
they'd have protests.
If the recruiter were representing something
that some of the areas that contributed to the war
effort, they would have a protest. And the
university, I think pretty soon, got to the point
that as long as they don't block any passageways,
as long as they don't disrupt an activity, as long
as they're orderly, let them sit there. And
occasionally you'd find one individual that
would be causing a little bit of trouble and we'd
just have to get them out of the building. And that
was handled by the University Police and handled
very cautiously and very considerately. I did not
see on the University campus during the years that
I was there and during the height of the activism
and demonstrations, I didn't see what I would
consider active violence. I saw had some of the
tear gas get in my eyes when I'd be on the campus and
sit in at the Student Union one time. They couldn't
get the protesters to come out, so they used the
tear gas or mace and got them out of there. But this
was, I guess, as much violence as I witnessed
there. the tires on a couple of university cars
were slashed and they were flat when they came out
to take them away. But the university, I think, saw
that some of its rules and regulations needed
examination. There's one in particular that
marijuana, by the way, drugs became an issue, and
it was believed that one of the places where a lot of
the use of marijuana and other drugs was pretty
rampant was among the representatives of the SDS
group. Now that's not to say that there weren't
others doing it as well, but they
had some people that got into trouble with drugs,
and the regents established
a very strict rule that says a student who is found
in possession of, making any use of, marijuana or
any other drug would be expelled from the
university. And so for a few months and maybe a year
or two, the students who were involved on campus or
off campus with marijuana or other drugs,
hallucinatory drugs, would be expelled from the
university. And I just automatically, in our
office, administered that
preservation of the regulation. But we went to
court.
And the university lost that case. That was too
strong and too rigid and didn't take room for the
first offender, and it didn't take room for a
person who just maybe was caught up in an
atmosphere where it could be said that they just
was led into it. coerced into it. So that rule was
changed.
Another issue that, of course, had been mentioned
was the minority enrollment. The university
hired a Mrs. Duren, a black woman, a very fine white
woman, to represent the black students' causes on
the campus. She was known as an advocate or an
ombudsman, but her sole responsibility was to
listen to, counsel, encourage, do whatever she
could to promote the black students' interests
and concerns. And she did a fine job. And I think,
generally speaking, the people on the university
campus were interested in promoting enrollment
of the blacks, encouraging them to come. And I,
during the thirteen years I was there, I was
involved with the orientation programs for the
new students, and I would make it a point to meet all
the students, and I specifically would go to the
black students, the Spanish students, any
students that were not Anglo, and I would try to
make them feel welcome. But I noticed in the last
few years, and I always had to make the overture,
but I noticed the last two or three years that I was
there, the black students were making overtures
toward me. They'd see me stand over there and find
out I was associated with the university, and
they'd come over there and they'd say, what's your
job, what do you do, what, so on and so forth. So I
found a more relaxed atmosphere. That's not to say
that they've ever until now achieved the kind of
enrollment for the blacks that they need to have or
want to have. But there was a great change while I
was there. And of course, as you say that, you may be
telling about the change that one goes through
himself. I had the experience of working with 125
black people in the Navy. And I found out that while
I was working to try to get to know them, I was
learning a lot about myself. And so I think that
would be true of the experience there.
Alright, are there any specific problems or
violations with SES that you remember? Yes, the
one that comes to my mind first is that Vice
President, presidential candidate Hubert
Humphreys was to speak in the city auditorium in
Austin on Sunday. And on Saturday, the SDS
organization held a rally up on the mall, the West
Mall of the campus, getting organized for a
protest at the Hubert Umpress speaking downtown.
And they were charged by the university through
the student organization's office. they were
charged for having an unauthorized rally, and
they were taken before a committee. And of course,
the position of the SDS and those who argued and
they were hacked was that that was prohibiting
Iraq to assemble. But the university had some
stated rules and regulations
demonstrations on the campus about use of
university facilities, and they had to drop off a
piece of paper that would indicate that they were
going to have this happening, this event on the
campus, and they didn't do that. And so there was a
great deal of problem of getting a committee. We
had a list of thirty faculty members from which we
could pick three faculty members and two students
from the student list that formed the committee to
hear the case. And with the help of some of the
activist professors, the students representing
the SDS, they eliminated 27 of the faculty
members, to call a name. that's in the legal terms,
they call it pre-entry. That's not the word.
Pre-entry, I guess it may be. Pre-empt to
challenge. And it means you could challenge
without cause and get rid of this fellow, that
fellow. But the final one to the hearing, and it was
a lengthy one, and I think I mentioned on the tape
about the man who wouldn't put his cap on. But
then the records that you found suggest that they
were kicked off of the campus for some regulation
violation and were off from April to November or
something like that. I don't remember the
specifics of that, but it may well be that as a
result of their unauthorized assembly. Failure
to have permission,
they were put off and then allowed to come back in
November. As a result of this experience, the
university set up a free speech area. There's an
area on the campus, and it happened to be the West
Mall where the demonstration had been held when
they were to go down to the auditorium and protest
on Prince Pete's. That area was designated, and
still the students or student organizations were
to come by and reserve that time so there wouldn't
be two or three groups at the same time. So the
procedure was You could use it any time you wanted
to, for whatever purpose you wanted to, student
organization. But they had, they had known in the
Student Activities Office.
Sorry to disdain you.
Could you discuss the university rules and
regulations, and do you feel they restricted
individual rights for the students? Well, let's
talk about regulations generally. I think it's
incumbent upon a college or university to have
some stated goals, some academic goals, and have
some rules and regulations concerning academic
matters. And I think it's appropriate to have some
rules and regulations concerning the students'
conduct and behavior. Now, of course, one of the
most debated issues in recent years has been the
hair and dress. And students' schools are still,
some of them today, saying your hair cannot be any
longer than touching the collar and so on. But they
found that they just can't win those in court over
and over again in trying to say how long your hair's
got to be or how you have to dress. But I think you
have to have some rules, some expectations that
the university states in its general catalog is
why it's usually found. expectations of the
student, and I think the protest movements have,
in general, moved the universities and colleges
into a more open field and more open atmosphere.
And, of course, with life, where you gain
something, you give up something. And I think that
some of the rules that were considered
restrictive by some students, they're actually
rules that the purpose by which they were
formulated are still genuine and good. But when a
student wants to do their own thing or a person
wants to do his own thing, They have to realize that
each area, each of our lives, and each environment
in which we find ourselves has some expectations.
And it could well be said, I think, that
traditionally
the teachers took the place of the parents The
colleges and universities said, bring your son or
daughter, sons and daughters to us and we'll look
after them. And so the parents had come to expect
that, some of them, and so there has to be rules.
There needs to be as much freedom of choice as can be
given within the framework of the mission of a
college or university. Now, I happen to hold the
notion that it's all right to teach right and
wrong. It's all right to say it's wrong to lie. It's
wrong to steal. It's wrong to cheat. And some
people say, well, that's none of your business.
But if someone is cheating in the classroom, there
has to be rules and regulations to govern that.
There's someone's behavior. as interfering with
the rights of others, there has to be some rule and
regulation and procedure and machinery to deal
with it. So I think that the intent of a rule should
be to give the individual student the right to grow
and develop as much as they can on their own, but
there are certain limits. It's like the road sign.
It's like the road map. When you get ready to
travel, you take a road map and you plot out your
course. And you learn where the rough places are in
the road. And if there's a detour, you move around
the detour. But I think that rules are not ugly
words. Rules are not bad things. Now, the rules can
be over-restricted, but I think freedom itself
carries a lot of responsibility, and
the university, colleges and universities have
to have them. They have to update them, but the
freedom to do one's own thing all the time is just
not something that's available to all of us.
There's an environment on the college or
university campus that has to be structured in a
rather orderly fashion, and that's what I would
think about the rules and regulations.
Do you think the rules and regulations the
university had were appropriate for the times?
No, no, because we didn't have any rules and
regulations concerning use of space or free
speech areas. We had to designate, needed to
designate a place where students could assemble
any time they wanted to. And I'm remembering,
believing that They just made it known to the
Activities Office that they would be holding a
demonstration at 10 o'clock on West Mall on
Wednesday. And so that if a crowd got up there,
they'd be authorized, that is to say. That space
had been reserved for them. So, yeah, they were
pretty restrictive. And there were a lot of the
can's and cannot's and do's and do not's that I
think were, some of them were restricted. But the
expectation
on the part of an individual or a group to say, well
I'll be able to go out and demonstrate anytime I
want to on the campus. And many times there's an
event going on on the campus, a lot of people on the
campus, and it would interfere. It would
interfere with that. Of course, I'm sure some
colleges and universities would be tempted, and
some of them may have, to select some free speech
area that's pretty well out of sight, and that's
not what the demonstrators want. They want to be
out front where they can be seen.
I guess I've already said it. Some of the
restrictions were restricted and didn't maybe
provide the kind of freedom that students should
have, just like living in the dormitory. We used to
require there that freshmen and sophomores had to
live in the University of
The housing where we used to supervise off-campus
housing, the regents took us out of that. They
said the students could live wherever they wanted
to. When I first went to the university, a student
lived at Ms. Adams' boarding house and hadn't paid
the board bill, but she'd report it to us and we'd
say, pay your board bill or you'll be dropped out of
school.
In order to stay in school, pay your board bill. And
I could even, at the old store downtown, they could
be barred from readmission until that bill was
paid. Well, that was too much involvement in a
person's private life.